
--- PAGE 1 ---

SVD-based Causal Emergence for Gaussian Iterative Systems
Kaiwei Liu1, Linli Pan1, Zhipeng Wang1, Mingzhe Yang1, Bing Yuan2and Jiang Zhang∗1,2
1School of Systems Science, Beijing Normal University, 100875, Beijing, China
2Swarma Research, 102300, Beijing, China
Abstract
Causal emergence (CE) based on effective information (EI) demonstrates that macro-states can exhibit stronger
causal effects than micro-states in dynamics. However, the identification of CE and the maximization of EI
both rely on coarse-graining strategies, which is a key challenge. A recently proposed CE framework based
on approximate dynamical reversibility, utilizing singular value decomposition (SVD), is independent of coarse-
graining. Still, it is limited to transition probability matrices (TPM) in discrete states. To address this, this
article proposes a novel CE quantification framework for Gaussian iterative systems (GIS), based on approximate
dynamical reversibility derived from the SVD of inverse covariance matrices in forward and backward dynamics.
The positive correlation between SVD-based and EI-based CE, along with the equivalence condition, is given
analytically. After that, we provide precise coarse-graining strategies directly from singular value spectra and
orthogonal matrices. This new framework can be applied to any dynamical system with continuous states and
Gaussian noise, such as auto-regressive growth models, Markov-Gaussian systems, and even SIR modeling using
neural networks (NN). Numerical simulations on typical cases validate our theory and offer a new approach to
studying the CE phenomenon, emphasizing noise and covariance over dynamical functions in both known models
and machine learning.
Keywords:Causal emergence, approximate dynamical reversibility, Gaussian iterative systems, singular value
decomposition, inverse covariance matrix.
1 Introduction
Complex systems with dynamics are ubiquitous in the world around us, such as ecosystems [1], organisms [2, 3],
brains [4–6], and cells [7, 8]. The interrelations between different dimensions and the accumulation of randomness
result in entropy production and disorder, thereby complicating the analysis of dynamics of microscopic composition,
such as individuals in society, cells in the human body, and atoms in matter [9, 10]. Many scholars contend that
complex systems conceal profound patterns and regularities within their apparent disorder. For example, it is difficult
to accurately describe the motion trajectory of microscopic molecules in gases or liquids, but the changes of both
can be clearly described macroscopically using temperature and pressure. So they try to derive dynamical models
of the systems at the macro-level by coarse-graining the dynamical systems, discovering that the strength of the
causal effect [11–14] for macro-states can surpass those of micro-states, a phenomenon called causal emergence (CE)
[15–20].
The typical quantitative framework for CE proposed by Hoel et al. [16, 17, 21] is based on effective information
(EI) [15], demonstrating that coarse-grained macro-states may have larger EI than micro-states, especially in Boolean
networks [22], cellular automatons [23], even in Gaussian iterative systems (GIS) [24, 25]. With theoretical support,
the study in Neural Information Squeezer plus (NIS+) [26, 27] based on Hoel’s EI framework utilizes neural networks
(NN) to maximize EI and identify CE in data of the Boids model [28] or fRMI [29]. However, the dependence on
coarse-graining strategies during maximizing EI within Hoel’s framework presents challenges. Both in NIS+ and
analytic calculation, this dependence necessitates not only computing both the dynamic function of micro and macro
states to get their EI, but also optimizing the coarse-graining strategy to maximize macro EI, significantly reducing
computational efficiency.
Some research is independent of predefined coarse-graining strategies and directly calculates systems’ CE without
the optimization procedure. A notable example is Rosas’ framework [18], which is based on integrated information
∗Email: zhangjiang@bnu.edu.cn
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

decomposition theory [30, 31], and CE is quantified by calculating the synergic information (Syn) across micro-
variables. However, this approach is challenging to implement due to the combinatorial explosion. Although Rosas
proposed approximate methods [32–34] with results on real-world datasets, such as ECoG [35] or MEG [36], these
methods require predefined macro-state variables and representation learning, which can’t provide accurate solutions.
In addition, Barnett and Seth proposed a framework [19] for quantifying CE via dynamical independence. Yet, this
framework has only been applied to linear systems [37]. Both methods utilize mutual information, making their
results sensitive to data and limiting their ability to capture the system’s essential CE.
To find a more essential quantification of CE, Zhang et al. recently proposed a CE quantification framework based
on singular value decomposition (SVD) [38] for probability transition matrices (TPM), which is independent of the
optimization of coarse-graining strategies and can simplify the calculation process of maximizing EI in a discrete
probability space. Besides, the framework introduces the new concept of approximate dynamical reversibility derived
from SVD to quantify the strength of causal effects, which describes the proximity of TPM to a permutation matrix.
SVD-based CE can be quantified as the potential maximal efficiency increase of approximate dynamical reversibility.
This work also finds that the essence of CE lies in redundancy, represented by irreversible and correlated information
pathways. What’s more, this article demonstrates a strong correlation between the SVD-based and EI-based CE
with maximized EI. However, this method only applies to discrete Markov chains [39] or complex networks [40, 41]
and lacks an analytical and exact relation between the two quantifications of CE. More research is needed to extend
this method to general dynamical systems with continuous states like GIS, which is the necessary path to apply CE
theory to continuous real-number Euclidean probability spaces [42, 43].
Based on previous theories of CE, our new research has four motivations. Firstly, for frameworks, SVD-based CE
needs to be extended to dynamical systems with continuous real-number Euclidean probability spaces, and a more
precise comparison between SVD-based and EI-based CE is required, which is also the main purpose of our work
to achieve. Secondly, for models, we intend to develop an analytical solution that is independent of coarse-graining
and maximizes EI for CE for GIS. Next, after obtaining the SVD-based CE of GIS, we aim to identify accurate
parameters for the coarse-graining strategy and develop a universal algorithm to achieve this. Finally, to apply our
new framework, we aim to extend the SVD-based CE theory presented in our paper to NN, which can be used to
learn the dynamics in data and compute CE, while significantly enhancing operational efficiency.
Driven by the above motivations, the main contributions of this article can be summarized into four parts: (1)
Extend SVD-based CE to GIS via SVD on inverse covariance matrices of forward/backward dynamics (Section 2.1.3
and 2.2); (2) Present analytical correlations between SVD-based and EI-based CE (Section 2.2.2); (3) Propose SVD-
based coarse-graining using orthogonal matrices (Section 2.2.3 and 2.2.4); (4) Apply our framework to two different
Gaussian systems and a trained NN model (Section 2.3). The details are elaborated in the following sections.
2 Results
2.1 Basic theories
2.1.1 Dynamics
Many real-world complex systems, whether physical, biological, economic, or social, exhibit dynamical behavior
constructed by the interplay of deterministic laws and random disturbances as
xt+1=f(x t) +ε t, εt∼ N(0,Σ),(2.1)
xt∈ Rn,Σ∈ Rn×n, which we called Gaussian iterative systems (GIS) [44, 45].f(x t) :Rn→ Rncaptures
deterministic dynamics, such as the Logistic function [46], the linear function [37] (examples in Section 2.3.1 and
2.3.2), or discretized differential equations (examples in Section 2.3.3).ε tdenotes random noise, accounting for
perturbations or unmodeled effects.
For the convenience of analyzing the evolution of the entire system, we can use Taylor expansion in Appendix
D.1 to linearize the functionf(x t) locally and transform the system into a linear GIS as
xt+1=a0+Ax t+εt, εt∼ N(0,Σ),(2.2)
wherea 0, xt∈ Rn, andA,Σ∈ Rn×nare the two most important parameters describing the properties of the
dynamics. Eq.(2.2) can also be treated as a conditional probability or continuous TPM matrix as
p(xt+1|xt) =N(Ax t+a0,Σ),(2.3)
Appendix A.2.3 shows more details about which. The effects of parametersAand Σ under the simplest one-
dimensional linear dynamics are shown in Fig.1.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
 (e)
 (f)
Figure 1: For the one-dimensional GISx t+1=ax t+εt, εt∼ N(0, σ2), the dynamics under three different parameter
sets, under two different intervention distributionsp(x t), show the resulting distributionp(x t+1) and the causal effect
measure. For any given probability densityp(x t) at timet, the conditional probabilityp(x t+1|xt) =N(a 0+Ax t,Σ)
corresponding to the forward dynamics gives the probability densityp(x t+1) at the next time stept+ 1. In (a)
and (d), when we stipulatea= 1.5, σ= 0.1, the effective informationJ= 1.298 and the dimensional average
reversible information ˆγ α= 2.505 are satisfied. In (b) and (e), we increaseσtoσ= 0.2. At this time, due to
the decrease in determinism,Jreduces toJ= 0.596, the dimensional average reversible information ˆγ α= 1.812,
and the approximate reversibility and causal effect strength are reduced simultaneously. Return to the state of (a)
(d), and then increaseain (c) (f) toa= 2. At this time, due to the increase in non-degeneracy, the causal effect
strength increases toJ= 1.576, and the dimensional average reversible information increases to ˆγ α= 2.649. From
this simple case, we can initially obtain three pieces of information: (1)Jand ˆγ αare only related top(x t+1|xt),
and the probability densityp(x t) ofx tcan be defined arbitrarily; (2)Jand ˆγ αare both positively correlated with
determinism and non-degeneracy, and increase synchronously with the increase ofaand decrease synchronously with
the increase ofσ; (3)Jand ˆγ αare positively correlated.
2.1.2 Causality
The definition of causality is crucial for our research. In a linear dynamical system as described in Eq.(2.2), the
statex tat timetcauses changes in statex t+1at the subsequent timet+ 1. Thus, we can assume thatx tis the
cause andx t+1is the effect. This paper focuses on the strength of this causal effect between consecutive states at
timetandt+ 1, quantified by the effective informationEI=I(x t, xt+1|do(x t)) for GIS [24, 25], which is defined as
J ≡1
nI(xt+1|do(x t∼ U([−L/2, L/2]n))) = lnpdet(ATΣ−1A)1
2nL
(2πe)1
2=1
2nrX
i=1lnsi+ lnL
(2πe)1
2,(2.4)
pdet(·) represents the pseudo-determinant [47] of matrix·, which is equivalent to the determinant det(·) when·is
full-rank. The operatordo(·) signifies manual intervention, wherex t∼ U([−L/2, L/2]n) after applyingdo(·) onx t,
withLbeing the interval size. Eq.(2.4) expandsJinto the sum of lns i, wheres 1≥ ··· ≥s rare the singular values
ofATΣ−1A, andris its rank. The derivation process of EI can be found in Appendix A.1.1 and A.1.2.
The EI in Eq.(2.4) can be divided into two terms [16, 25]: determinism
Det= lnh
(2πe)−1
2pdet(Σ−1)1
2ni
(2.5)
and non-degeneracy
Nondeg= lnh
pdet(ATΣ−1A)1
2npdet(Σ)1
2nLi
.(2.6)
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

Non-degeneracy
 Determinism
(a)(b)
Figure 2: (a) Forp(x t+1|xt) =N(Ax t+a0,Σ), the covariance matrices of forward dynamicsx t+1=a0+Ax t+εtand
backward dynamicsx t=A†xt+1−A†a0−A†εtare Σ andA†Σ(A†)T, respectively. Σ andA†Σ(A†)Tdetermine the
approximate dynamical reversibility as Γ α. (b)α= 1 is often chosen to balance Γ α’s emphasis on both determinism
and degeneracy. Forα <1, Γ αtends to capture more non-degeneracy ofp(x t+1|xt). Forα >1, Γ αemphasizes the
determinism.
These two indicators describe the degree of uncertainty of the effect variable when given the cause variable and the
degree of uncertainty of the cause variable when given the effect variable.
As shown in Fig.1, for the one-dimensional GISx t+1=ax t+εt, εt∼ N(0, σ2), the probability densityp(x t+1)
at timet+ 1 can be inferred fromp(x t) using the conditional probabilityp(x t+1|xt). By varying parameters, we
observe changes in the strength of the causal effect (J). First, we stipulatea= 1, σ= 0.1 in Fig.1a, d, the strength
of causal effectJ= 1.289. Then we increaseσtoσ= 0.2, as shown in Fig.1b, e, due to the decrease of determinism,
Jdecreases toJ= 0.596. After returning to the original state, we increaseatoa= 2, as shown in Fig.1c, f, due to
the increase in non-degeneracy,Jincreases toJ= 1.576. We can find two rules. First, the probability densityp(x t)
of the initialx tdoes not affect the strength of the causal effect. Whether it is the normal distribution in Fig.1a, b,
and c or the uniform distribution in Fig.1d, e, and f, as long asp(x t+1|xt) is the same, the strength of the causal
effect remains unchanged. Second, we can see that the strength of the dynamic causal effect is positively correlated
with the parametera(orA, reflecting non-degeneracy) and negatively correlated with the standard deviationσ(or
Σ, reflecting determinism).
2.1.3 Approximate dynamical reversibility
Another important property of dynamics that people are concerned about is dynamical reversibility. In Eq.(2.2),
whenε t= 0 andf(x t) =a 0+Ax tis a reversible one-to-one mapping onRn, we assume that the dynamics of GIS
described by Eq.(2.2) is strictly reversible asx t+1=a0+Ax t, and the corresponding backward dynamics of Eq.(2.2)
can be directly established asx t=A−1(xt+1−a0). However, real-world dynamical systems are not always so simple
and perfect. The presence of random noise and the irreversibility of the matrixAinfmapping can lead to the
irreversibility of the dynamical system.
Strict dynamical reversibility is a highly specialized case. However, for general dynamics, although it is not
necessarily strictly reversible, it may be approximately reversible. For example, iff(x t) =a 0+Ax tis a reversible
function, then dynamics like Eq.(2.1) with a smaller noise variance are closer to reversible dynamicsx t+1=f(x t)
than a larger one. Therefore, for more general irreversible dynamics, we can use approximate dynamical reversibility
to measure their closeness to reversible dynamics. In [38], Zhang et al. provide a general measure of approximate
dynamical reversibility for discrete Markov chains, defined as the sum of theαpowers of the singular values of the
TPM (shown in Appendix A.2.1).
In this paper, we extend the concepts in [38] to the dynamics of GIS like Eq.(2.2) and use the singular value
spectrum in functional analysis [48] and the Fourier transform [49] method to find an indicator for local approximate
dynamical reversibility in a general GIS (We give the detailed derivation and calculation Appendix A.2.4 and A.2.5),
defined as
Γα=2π
αn
2
pdet(ATΣ−1A)1
2−α
4pdet(Σ−1)α
4, (2.7)
where pdet(·) represents pseudo-determinant of the matrix·. When the matrix·is full-rank, it has the same
meaning as the determinant det(·). Besides the first constant, this formula contains two terms: pdet(·) of the inverse
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

covariance matrices of the forward and backward dynamics. This is clearer when we assumeAand Σ are reversible
matrices. In this case, the forward dynamics isx t+1=a0+Ax t+εt, and the corresponding backward dynamics is
xt=A−1(xt+1−a0−εt). The corresponding conditional probability distributions arep(x t+1|xt) =N(a 0+Ax t,Σ)
andp(x t|xt+1) =N(A−1(xt+1−a0), A−1Σ(A−1)T), it can be seen that Σ−1andATΣ−1Arepresent the inverse
covariance matrices of the forward and backward dynamics, respectively. Appendix A.2.3 also proves that whenA
is not invertible, using the pseudo-inverse (·)†[50, 51] instead of the inverse (·)−1can yield the same result as shown
in Fig.2a.
αis a constant representing the relative influence of the covariances of the forward and backward dynamics on
Γα, and a detailed derivation is provided in Appendix A.2.6 . Whenα→0, Γ α→0= 2π
αn
2
α→0pdet(ATΣ−1A)1
2is
determined by the inverse covariance matrix of the backward dynamics, including the pdet(ATΣ−1A) term that plays
a major role inNondegin Eq.(2.6), reflecting the non-degeneracy after eliminating the forward dynamics covariance
(or determinism) interference. Whenα= 2, Γ 2= (π)n
2pdet(Σ−1)1
2is determined by the inverse covariance matrix of
the forward dynamics, compared to theDetin Eq.(2.5), it reflects determinism. Generally, we can stipulate Γ = Γ 1
asα= 1 to balance the proportion of determinism and non-degeneracy as shown in Fig.2b.
Γαcan be considered a measure of approximate dynamical reversibility because when the uncertainty in the
system’s forward and backward dynamics (i.e., the pseudo-determinant of the covariance matrix) is large, the pseudo-
determinants of Σ−1andATΣ−1Abecome very small, and the dynamics become highly irreversible. Conversely, if
the uncertainty in the system’s forward and backward dynamics is very small, or even approaches zero, the pseudo-
determinants of Σ−1andATΣ−1Abecome very large, or even approach infinity. In this case, the system’s dynamics
are very close to reversible dynamics, and using the de-noised reversible dynamics to approximate the GIS becomes
effective.
In order to avoid the excessive influence of variable dimension on the reversibility of dynamics, we can use the
dimensional average reversible informationγ α≡1
nln Γαto more effectively quantify the approximate dynamical
reversibility. After removing the constant term, ˆγ α=γα−1
2ln 2π
α
is a variable only determined by the singular
values after the SVD of Σ−1andATΣ−1A.
Lemma 2.1.(Dimensional average reversible information based on SVD) For GIS like Eq.(2.2), we only need to
obtain the singular value spectra of inverse covariance matricesATΣ−1AandΣ−1to quantify the approximate dy-
namical reversibility. The corresponding indicator is the dimensional average reversibility information after removing
the constant term, defined as
ˆγα=1
n"
(1
2−α
4)rsX
i=1lnsi+α
4rκX
i=1lnκi#
(2.8)
Herer s, rκdenote the ranks of matricesATΣ−1A,Σ−1, respectively.s iandκ idenote thei-th singular value of
matricesATΣ−1Aand matrixΣ−1respectively.
Furthermore, by comparing the expression ofJ, we can obtain the approximate linear correlation between
approximate dynamical reversibility and EI, as shown in the following theorem. A detailed proof is provided in
Appendix B.1.
Theorem 2.1.(Correlation betweenJandˆγ α): When the backward dynamicsp(x t|xt+1)is close to a normalized
normal distribution asATΣ−1A≈I n,Jandˆγ αsatisfies
ˆγα≃(1−α
4)J+C, (2.9)
Where≃denotes approximate equality, this equality holds strictly whenAis of full rank andATΣ−1A=I n, meaning
the backward dynamicsp(x t|xt+1)is a normalized normal distribution.C= (1−α
4) ln(L√
2πe)is a constant term.
The relationship between reversibility and causal effect measures can also be demonstrated through numerical
examples in Section 2.1.2. As shown in Fig.1, for a one-dimensional GIS,x t+1=ax t+εt, εt∼ N(0, σ2), we can
observe the same case as analysisJ. First, in Fig.1a, d, when we seta= 1.5, σ= 0.1, the dimensionally averaged
approximate dynamical reversibility information ˆγ α= 2.505. Then, in Fig.1b, e we adjustσtoσ= 0.2, we can get
ˆγα= 1.812. Ifais increased toa= 2 in Fig.1c, f, under this condition ˆγ α= 2.649. From this simple example, we
can see the positive correlation between the dimensionally averaged approximately reversible information ˆγ αand the
effective informationJ. At the same time, both indicators are only related to the conditional probabilityp(x t+1|xt)
and have nothing to do withp(x t). This demonstrates that for a linear GIS like Eq.(2.2), there is a certain equivalence
between the approximate dynamical reversibility and the strength of the causal effect.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

2.2 Causal emergence (CE)
In this section, we discuss the core content of this paper, causal emergence (CE).
2.2.1 Background: causal emergence based on maximizing EI
Based on the concept of EI, [16, 17] defines and discusses CE for discrete-state systems with Markov chains in
detail. For linear GIS, a quantitative characterization of CE based on maximizing EI is to simplify the description
ofx tby taking any given coarse-graining mappingy t=ϕ(x t) =Wx t, W∈ Rk×n, k < n, wherekdenotes the
macroscopic dimension. Thus, we can obtain a macroscopic variabley tand its corresponding macroscopic dynamics
yt+1=A Mxt+εt, εt∼ N(0,Σ M). Furthermore, according to the definition of Eq.(2.4), the macro dynamics will
have a macro effective informationJ M. Then, through
∆J=J M− J= lnpdet(AT
MΣ−1
MAM)1
2k
pdet(ATΣ−1A)1
2n,(2.10)
we can directly calculate the value of CE, whereA M=WAW†and Σ M=WΣWTis affected byW, so ∆Jdepends
on the coarse-graining strategyϕ(x t) =Wx tespecially its parameter matrixW.
To make CE independent ofW, Hoel et al. and Liu et al. [16, 17, 25, 52] proposed the principle of maximizing
the EI of the macro-state, that is, optimizingWso thatJ Mis maximized. However, this general maximization
problem is difficult to solve directly, so we consider a special case. In this case, whenWis a unitary matrix, we can
calculate CE based on EI maximization, influenced by the matrix’s singular values as
∆J∗=1
2kkX
i=1lnsi−1
2nrX
i=1lnsi,(2.11)
in whichs 1≥ ··· ≥s nrepresents the singular values of the matrixATΣ−1A. We find that the essence of CE in this
case is that after removing the smaller singular values, the average of the larger singular values will be larger than
the average of all singular values of the original matrix. The calculation process can be found in Appendix A.1.3 or
[25]. The operation method for selecting the suitable macro dimensionkis detailed in Appendix A.1.4, whose idea
originates from [53].
2.2.2 Causal emergence based on approximate dynamical reversibility with SVD
CE theories based on maximizing EI require solving an optimization problem to obtain the optimal coarse-graining
strategy, a process that is often difficult to solve. Therefore, we need a more direct, approximately equivalent definition
of CE that does not rely on the coarse-graining strategy. This is a definition of CE based on the concept of dynamical
reversibility. It transforms the problem of solving the optimal coarse-graining solutionWinto SVD.
We have now demonstrated that the approximate dynamical reversibility of GIS can be quantified directly based
on SVD of Σ−1andATΣ−1A, and has an approximately linear relationship with maximized EI. We also know that
traditional EI-based CE relies on coarse-graining strategies and macro dynamics, but after maximizing EI whenW
is a unitary matrix, CE can also be obtained by eliminating the singular values ofATΣ−1A. So, can we directly
define a metric for CE based on the singular value spectrum, bypassing the search for the optimal coarse-graining
solutionW? This is the basic idea of the quantitative definition of SVD-based CE.
From the definition of dimensional average reversible information ˆγ αin the Section 2.1.3, we can obtain that its
final value depends on two spectra, one is the spectrums 1≥ ··· ≥s nofATΣ−1A, and the other is the spectrum
κ1≥ ··· ≥κ nof Σ−1. Therefore, following the quantitative equation of CE (Eq.(2.11)), we can define CE based on
approximate dynamical reversibility from the distribution of these two spectra as follows (The detailed calculation
process is in Appendix B).
Definition 2.1.(Causal emergence based on approximate dynamical reversibility with SVD): For the dynamics of
the form in Eq.(2.2), the CE based on the approximate dynamical reversibility with SVD is
∆Γα(ϵ)≡ˆγ α(ϵ)−ˆγ α=1
rϵ"
(1
2−α
4)rϵX
i=1lnsi+α
4rϵX
i=1lnκi#
−1
n"
(1
2−α
4)rsX
i=1lnsi+α
4rκX
i=1lnκi#
. (2.12)
We define the effective rankr ϵas the dimension of the new system whose approximate dynamical reversibility is
enhanced after eliminating all dimensions containing singular values less than a given threshold, that is, satisfying
6

--- PAGE 7 ---

1 2 3 4￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
Figure 3: This figure illustrates how to filter the dimensions of dynamics through SVD. The singular values of Σ−1
andATΣ−1Aboth have a clear numerical decay between the second and third dimensions. Therefore, we can set a
thresholdϵ(horizontal dashed line) at this location and perform a truncation, thereby ignoring singular values close
to zero and their corresponding dimensions to the right of the truncation (vertical dashed line), while retaining the
remaining singular values and their corresponding dimensions that are significantly greater than zero.
κi< ϵors i< ϵ. This situation is also called vague CE. IfATΣ−1AorΣ−1is not full-rank, then whenϵ= 0, the
situation∆Γ α(0)>0will still occur. We define this situation as clear CE. These are the two forms of SVD-based
CE quantification methods.
Based on this quantitative approach, we only need to know the singular values of Σ−1andATΣ−1Aand observe
their singular value spectra to clearly determine whether CE exists. For example, if we assume that the four
dimensions of the dynamics are completely independent of each other, andA,Σ are both diagonal matrices, then the
singular vectors corresponding to the singular valuess iandκ iare the basis vectors of each dimension. As shown
in the Fig.3, we can plot the singular value spectra by sorting all dimensions from largest to smallest according to
their corresponding singular values. From Fig.3, we see that the singular values of Σ−1andATΣ−1Aboth have
a clear numerical decay between the second and third dimensions. Therefore, we can set a thresholdϵ(horizontal
dashed line) at this location and perform a truncation, thereby ignoring singular values close to zero and their
corresponding dimensions to the right of the truncation (vertical dashed line), while retaining the remaining singular
values and their corresponding dimensions that are significantly greater than zero. In other words, from this graph,
we can simply observe whether there are singular values close to or equal to zero on the singular value spectra to
determine whether CE exists. If so, CE has occurred in the system; otherwise, it has not. This observation can
be directly quantified using the approximate dynamical reversibility. For the more general cases, we give a suitable
coarse-graining strategy in Section 2.2.4.
From physical perspectives, if the inverse covariance matrix of the forward or backward dynamics of a system
contains one or more zero or approximately zero singular values, the system is said to have experienced CE. The
singular vectors corresponding to these zero or approximately zero singular values represent redundant dimensions
in the dynamics, and their presence significantly reduces the overall approximate dynamical reversibility of the
system. Furthermore, suppose the redundant dimensions corresponding to these zero singular values are eliminated
through appropriate coarse-graining strategies. In that case, dimensionality reduction can be achieved to eliminate
the redundant dimensions of the dynamics, and the average approximate dynamical reversibility of the compressed
dimensions will be improved. Therefore, the intensity of CE of the system can be quantitatively characterized
based on the maximum possible increase in approximate dynamical reversibility, that is, the maximum degree of
improvement in unit-dimensional approximate dynamical reversibility that can be achieved through ideal coarse-
graining strategies.
2.2.3 Rationality analysis
This framework is reasonable, and the most important reason is that our new definition of CE is consistent with
Hoel et al.’s definition [16, 17, 21, 24, 54–56].
7

--- PAGE 8 ---

Firstly, there is an approximate linear relationship, analytically, between CE based on SVD and CE based on
maximizing EI. There is detailed proof in Appendix B.1.
Theorem 2.2.(Correlation between∆Γ α(ϵ)and∆J∗): When the backward dynamicsp(x t|xt+1)is close to a
normalized normal distribution asATΣ−1A≈I n,∆Γ α(ϵ)and∆J∗are approximately linear and positively correlated
as
∆Γα(ϵ)≃(1−α
4)∆J∗. (2.13)
The equal sign holds when the backward dynamicsp(x t|xt+1)is a normalized normal distribution asATΣ−1A=I n.
From a logical perspective, our definition of CE is actually an approximate necessary condition for maximizing
EI-based CE as defined by Hoel et al. [16, 17]. In other words, for any Markov dynamics, if we want to find a coarse-
graining strategy that maximizes EI, we can actually perform SVD on the dynamics first. For example, the discussion
at the end of [25] on the case whereWis a unitary matrix actually transforms the coarse-graining strategy into a
screening of singular values of the matrixATΣ−1A, which is part of the calculation of SVD-based CE, namely the SVD
of the inverse covariance matrixATΣ−1A=USUTof backward dynamics. If the singular valuesS= diag(s 1,···, s n),
and the orthogonal singular vector matrixU= (u 1,···, u n), in order to preserve the maximumksingular values,
we only need to preserve the dimensions corresponding to these singular vectorsU 1= (u 1,···, u k) and discard
U2= (u k+1,···, u n). Due to the orthogonality ofU, we can directly obtainUT
1ATΣ−1AU1=UT
1USUTU1=
diag(s 1,···, s k). It can be seen that we only need to multiply the coarse-graining parameter matrixW=UT
1by
the original variables to make the inverse covariance matrixWATΣ−1AWTof the macroscopic backward dynamics
become a diagonal matrix that only retainss 1,···, s k. The singular vectorsu 1,···, u kcorresponding to those larger
singular values actually correspond to the optimal coarse-graining strategy we are looking for.
Although there is a high likelihood that the two frameworks overlap, they are not entirely equivalent because the
coarse-graining strategy obtained by maximizing EI ignores the covariance of forward dynamics. So, we propose an
algorithm that constructs a coarse-graining strategy based on SVD, considering both the inverse covariance matrices
Σ−1andATΣ−1Aof the forward and backward dynamics, and attempts to preserve the maximum singular values
of the two matrices as much as possible. In this way, it can ensure that the coarse-graining strategy matrixWis
unitary, and only the singular values of the inverse covariance matrix will be screened without changing the singular
values, so that the probability space retained by the macro dynamics and the corresponding micro dynamics has
the same probability distribution, and it can also ensure that both forward and backward dynamics are taken into
account in the calculation of the coarse-graining strategy at the same time without only focusing on one side. For
detailed information, we can refer to Section 2.2.4.
2.2.4 Coarse-graining strategy based on SVD
According to [38], the approximate dynamical reversibility Γ αobtained by SVD is approximately equivalent to
maximizing EI in macroscopic dynamics, which is reflected in the fact that the singular vector corresponding to the
maximum singular value of TPM is approximately consistent with the direction of maximizing macroscopic EI (shown
in Appendix A.2.2). Furthermore, according to Section 2.2.1, applying SVD to the matrixATΣ−1Amaximizes the
effective informationJ Mof the macro dynamics, assumingWis a unitary matrix. Similarly, the direction of the
singular vectors corresponding to the largestksingular value indicates the direction that maximizesJ Mwhen the
macroscopic dimension isk. Since the definition of Γ αincludes the singular value spectra of both Σ−1andATΣ−1A,
in this new framework, we can directly perform singular value decomposition on Σ−1andATΣ−1A, then analyze
and filter the combined singular value spectra, retaining the singular vector corresponding to the largest singular
value to construct a coarse-graining strategy.
However, in this process, the singular vectors to be retained by the two matrices Σ−1andATΣ−1Amay be
orthogonal and non-orthogonal at the same time, which means there are conflicting parts in the linear subspaces
spanned by them that need to be balanced and traded off. To do this, we need to specify a two-step coarse-graining
strategy. First, all the singular valuess 1≥ ··· ≥s nandκ 1≥ ··· ≥κ nare sorted from large to small to form a
new sequence ˜s 1≥ ··· ≥˜s 2n, and then truncated with the thresholdϵto obtain the new singular value spectrum
˜S1= diag(˜s 1, . . . ,˜s rϵ1) and the corresponding singular vector matrix ˜U1= (˜u 1, . . . ,˜u rϵ1)∈ Rn×rϵ1,rϵ1<2ndenotes
the effective rank obtained from the first step. Then perform the second step SVD, ˆUˆSˆVT=˜U1˜S1, on˜U1˜S1∈ Rn×rϵ1,
use the same thresholdϵto truncate the new singular value spectrum ˆs 1≥ ··· ≥ˆs min{n,r ϵ1}inˆS, retain the singular
values greater thanϵand their corresponding singular vectors and form the matrix ˆU1∈ Rn×rϵ2, wherer ϵ2< nis
the final effective rank of the second SVD and defines the dimensionr ϵof the macroscopic state asr ϵ=rϵ2.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---

The final coarse-grained strategy is given by the linear transformationϕ(x) =Wx, where the parameter matrix is
defined asW= ˆUT
1. The coarse-grained strategy construction process in algorithmic format and detailed description
can be found in Appendix C.
2.2.5 Expansion: Local causal emergence in nonlinear dynamics
The GIS we mentioned earlier are all special forms of linear dynamics with added random noise. However, in
reality, most system dynamics are nonlinear. Therefore, in order to measure the CE of nonlinear GIS, we need to
perform special processing on the system, and one of the most effective methods is local linearization. A nonlinear GIS
refers to a dynamical system in the form of Eq.(2.1). Although we cannot obtain a known global parameter matrix
ofAand Σ, if the functionfis a continuously differentiable function, we can perform a first-order Taylor expansion
on it in the domainf(x) =f(x′) +∇f(x′)(x−x′) +o(x−x′), which can be approximated as a linear function about
xin a very small interval centered onx′, and the function approximation is equivalent to a linear mapping. We can
define For the variablex tat any given time, its local iteration parameters areA xt=∇f(x′
t)≈ ∇f(x t).
Therefore, for nonlinear systems, we can quantify their local approximate dynamical reversibility as
Γxt
α=2π
αn
2
pdet(AT
xtΣ−1
xtAxt)1
2−α
4pdet(Σ−1
xt)α
4, (2.14)
And obtain its local CE
∆Γxt
α(ϵ) =1
rϵ"
(1
2−α
4)rϵX
i=1lnsxt
i+α
4rϵX
i=1lnκxt
i#
−1
n"
(1
2−α
4)rsX
i=1lnsxt
i+α
4rκX
i=1lnκxt
i#
. (2.15)
Its value depends on two singular value spectra nearx t, one is the singular value spectrumsxt
1≥ ··· ≥sxtncor-
responding to the local inverse covariance matrixA xtΣ−1
xtAT
xtof backward dynamics, and the other is the singular
value spectrumκxt
1≥ ··· ≥κxtnof Σ−1
xt. Therefore, our framework can also be extended to general forms of nonlinear
dynamics.
To obtain the global CE of the entire system, we can use the averaging method for the local CE to obtain
¯Γxt
α=1
|X|Z
XΓxt
αdxt,(2.16)
which is called global approximate reversibility, and CE can be derived from it.
However, the above method may produce different effective ranksr ϵand coarse-graining strategies in different
local regions (like Fig.5e and f in Section 2.3.3). For general problems, ifx t+1is approximately distributed within
the intervalX, andAT
xtΣ−1
xtAxtand Σ−1
xtdo not fluctuate or diverge significantly, we can first randomly sample and
then average the parameter matrix to obtainATΣ−1A=
AT
xtΣ−1
xtAxt
xt∈Xand Σ−1=
Σ−1
xt
xt∈Xto calculate the
two global inverse covariance matrices. Both matrices are dependent only on the spatialXand are independent of
time, yielding the same results regardless of the system’s evolution. Finally, we can calculate global CE based on
the definition of Γ αand empirically verify that it is more advisable to first average the two covariance matrices and
then calculate the global approximate dynamical reversibility because it better captures the essence of the system’s
dynamics, yielding a global singular value spectrum and coarse-graining strategy, rather than having different results
for each part. This result is similar to the result of first calculating the local Γxtαand then calculating the average
value under the condition thatXis stable and finite as ¯Γxtα≈Γα. The proof of the approximation can be found in
Appendix D.1.
The above is our theoretical part. In the next section, we will show the results of applying our framework to
some practical cases.
2.3 Experiments
In this section, we will provide the results of three numerical experimental examples to show the concepts and
conclusions derived in the previous sections. The first two are for GIS with known models, and the third one is the
application applied on a neural network trained by the time series data generated by a Susceptible-Infected-Recovered
(SIR) model.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---

(a) (b)
(e) (f)
(k)
(m)(i)
(n)(c)(l)(j)
(g) (h)(d)Malthusian￿growth￿models Discretized￿Brownian￿motion
(o)
Figure 4: Analytical solutions obtained from numerical simulations of known models. (a) A Malthusian growth
mode wherex 3, x4are copies ofx 1, x2. (b) A sample of trajectory generated by the Malthusian growth models with
growth rates of 0.2 and 0.05.x i,i= 1,2,3,4, are micro-states, whiley 1andy 2are theoretical macro-states obtained
by coarse-graining. (c) The backward dynamics inverse covariance matrixATΣ−1Awhenr(A) = 2. (d)ATΣ−1A
after random perturbations toA. (e) The singular value spectrum ofATΣ−1Aand Σ−1whenATΣ−1Aonly has two
singular values. Clear CE can be calculated as ∆Γ α(0) = 0.4034. (f) The singular value spectrum ofATΣ−1Aand
Σ−1whenAis perturbed. The degree of Vague CE is ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.4195 whenϵ= 2. (g) Coarse-graining parameterW
obtained by truncatingUin the presence of Clear CE, the number of columns represents the macroscopic dimension,
and the number of rows represents the microscopic dimension. (h) The coarse-graining parameterWfor the vague
CE case, the first macro-state dimension is determined byx 1, x3, and the second macro-state dimension is determined
byx 2, x4. (i) The samples of trajectories of the noise termε tin Brownian motion. (j) ParameterAof the drift
vectorµ=a 0+Ax t. (k) and (l) show the inverse of the covariance matrix of forward and backward dynamics,
which is Σ−1andATΣ−1A. (m) Singular value spectra of Σ−1andATΣ−1Awithϵ= 0.6. (n) Approximate CE
based on SVD ∆ΓW
α(ϵ) = ˆγW
α(ϵ)−γ α= 0.4907, which is close to the true value ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.5167. ∆ΓW
α(ϵ) obtained
byϕ(x t) =Wx tis closer to the true value ∆Γ α(ϵ) than ∆ΓUT
1α(ϵ) or ∆ΓVT
1α(ϵ) which directly useϕ(x t) =UT
1xtor
ϕ(xt) =VT
1xt. (o) The optimal coarse-graining strategy parameter matrixW, which preserves the non-conflicting
2nd and 3th dimensions, along with the 1st and 5th dimensions with larger singular valuesκ 1ands 1
10

--- PAGE 11 ---

2.3.1 Malthusian growth models
The first example contains 4 variables, in which the first two variablesx 1, x2follow the Malthusian growth model
[57] with different growth rates of 0.2 and 0.05. To study CE, we define the other two variablesx 3, x4as the copies
of the first two variables shown as Fig.4a, thus, they are redundant dimensions. Ifx= (x 1, x2, x3, x4), the evolution
ofxis a GISx t+1=a0+Ax t+εt, εt∼ N(0, σ2I4) asx t, xt+1∈ R4,σ2= 0.1,a 0= 0, and
A=
1.2 0 0 0
0 1.05 0 0
1.2 0 0 0
0 1.05 0 0
.(2.17)
A sample of evolutionary trajectories generated by this model is shown in Fig.4b,y 1andy 2are theoretical macro-
states obtained by coarse-graining. In this model, Σ =σ2·I4is a full rank matrix, so we only need to study the
inverse backward dynamics covariance matrixATΣ−1A(Fig.4c). This matrix only has two singular values as the
singular value spectrum is shown in Fig.4e withr= 2<4, the horizontal axis represents the sequence number of
singular values arranged in descending order ass 1≥ ··· ≥s 4, while the vertical axis represents the magnitude of
singular valuess i, so clear CE can be calculated as ∆Γ α(0) = 0.4034. Fig.4g shows the coarse-graining parameter
W∈ R2×4obtained by methods in Section 2.2.4, which is equal to truncating the orthogonal matrixUafter SVD of
ATΣ−1Ain this special case. When clear CE exists, variablesx 1andx 2hold all the relevant information contained
withinx 3andx 4. Therefore, the role ofϕ(x) =Wxis to remove the last two dimensions and only retain the first
two dimensions ofxto describe the evolution of the growth model.
To show the concept of vague CE, we can add some perturbations toAand obtain
A=
1.2 0 0 0
0 1.05 0.001 0
1.22 0 0.4 0.1
0 1.06 0.03 0.5
(2.18)
andATΣ−1A(Fig.4d) is a full rank matrix asr=n= 4. Then clear CE ∆Γ α(0) = 0. However, by observing the
singular value spectrum in Fig.4f, we can see that only two dimensions have significant impacts, so we need to calculate
vague CE. By using the threshold selection asϵ= 2, vague CE can be calculated as ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.4195. According to
Section 2.2.4, the coarse-graining parameterWis shown in Fig.4h, the columns represent the macroscopic dimensions,
and the rows represent the microscopic dimensions. Due to disturbances,x 3andx 4also contain some independent
information.ϕ(x) =Wx,W=UT
1, is to mergex 1andx 3,x2andx 4by weighted summation, and the two row-
vectors that make upWare exactly equal to the singular vectors corresponding to the two largest singular values
s1, s2.
This case illustrates that sometimes high dimensions may reduce the efficiency of reversibility of a system due
to dimensional redundancy. Retaining only the maximumr ϵsingular values of the inverse covariance matrix can
improve the efficiency of reversibility and generate CE.
2.3.2 Discretized Brownian motion
The design of this example is to demonstrate the need to simultaneously filter for singular values of Σ−1and
ATΣ−1A. Discretized Brownian motion is an approximation of continuous Brownian motion in discrete time, which
is always used for numerical simulation and stochastic process modeling. Eq.(2.2) can be regarded as a discrete
version of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) [58] process. In this model,µ=a 0+Ax tis the drift vector, which influences
the evolution of the state, andAis given as
A=
2.5819 0 0 1.6411 0 0 0 0
0 1.1298 0.0672 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1.0539 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 2.4617 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0.3162 0 0 0
0 0 0 0−0.1581 0.6123 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0.5477 0
0 0 0 0 0 0−0.0890 0.2519
,(2.19)
anda 0= 0. Covariance matrix Σ representing the diffusion coefficient, which determines the magnitude and corre-
lation of random fluctuations across dimensions ofε tlike Fig.4i.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---

As we setAas shown in Fig.4j, after perform SVD on Σ−1andATΣ−1Ain Fig.4k and Fig.4l, we can obtain
singular vector matricesU= (u 1,···, u n) andV= (v 1,···, v n) as
U=
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 01√
21√
20 0
0 0 0 0−1√
21√
20 0
0 0 0 0 0 01√
21√
2
0 0 0 0 0 0−1√
21√
2
, V=
0 0 0 01√
20 01√
2
01√
21√
20 0 0 0 0
0−1√
21√
20 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0−1√
20 01√
2
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
(2.20)
and diagonal matrices of singular values
S= diag(2,1.5,1.3,1.01,0.2,0.12,0.1,0.05)
K= diag(1.6,1.25,1.1,1.05,0.5,0.4,0.25,0.1).(2.21)
After obtaining the singular value spectra in Fig.4m, we specifyϵ= 0.6 to get ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.5167 and the number of
macro-states isr ϵ= 4. To obtain theoretical values ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.5167,s 1,···, s 4andκ 1,···, κ 4should be retained.
As we get the singular value spectrum of Σ−1andATΣ−1Ain Fig.4m, we can also calculate the coarse-graining
strategy based on SVD. According to Section 2.2.4, we can obtain the optimal coarse-graining strategy parame-
ter matrixWin Fig.4o, which preserves the non-conflicting 2nd and 3rd dimensions, along with the 1st and 5th
dimensions with larger singular valuesκ 1ands 1. So in reality, we retaineds 1, s2, s3, s5andκ 1, κ2, κ3, κ5.
The macro-state dynamics obtained throughϕ=Wx thave approximate dynamical reversibility ˆγW
α(ϵ). Through
it, we can obtain an approximate CE based on SVD ∆ΓW
α(ϵ) = ˆγW
α(ϵ)−γ α= 0.4907, which is close to the true
∆Γα(ϵ) = 0.5167. By comparing in Fig.4n, we can see that ∆ΓW
α(ϵ) obtained byϕ(x t) =Wx tis closer to the true
value ∆Γ α(ϵ) than ∆ΓUT
1α(ϵ) or ∆ΓVT
1α(ϵ) which directly useϕ(x t) =UT
1xtorϕ(x t) =VT
1xtand only consider one
direction in forward and backward dynamics.
2.3.3 SIR based on NN
Most systems in reality are unable to obtain precise dynamic models to calculate analytical solutions for CE, as
demonstrated in the previous two examples. However, we can train a neural network to obtain approximate dynamics
from observed time series data. Our third case is to show the phenomenon of CE obtained by a well-trained neural
network (NN) on the training time series data generated by a Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) dynamical model
[59] as shown in Fig.5b with the following dynamics:


dS
dt=−βSI,
dI
dt=βSI−γI,
dR
dt=γI,(2.22)
as shown in Fig.5a, whereS, I, R∈[0,1] represent the rate of susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals in a
population,β= 1 andγ= 0.5 are parameters for infection and recovery rates.
To generate the time series data of the micro-state, we adopt the same method as in our previous work of
NIS+ [27]. We generate data by converting dS/dt,dI/dtinto ∆S/∆t,∆I/∆tas ∆t= 0.01 and (S t+∆t, It+∆t)≈
(St, It) + (dS t/dt,dI t/dt)∆t. Then we duplicate the macro-state (S t, It) as shown in Fig.5c and added Gaussian
random noise to form the micro-statex tas
xt= (S t, It, St, It) +ξt, (2.23)
whereξt∼N(0,Σ) and
Σ =σ2
1−1
20 0
−1
21 0 0
0 0 1−1
2
0 0−1
21
.(2.24)
asσ2= 0.04.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---

(b)
(a)(c)
(e) (d) (g) (f)
(h) (i) (j) (k)
SIR￿models
(l)
 (m)
Figure 5: Numerical solution obtained by training the SIR model with a simple NN. (a) SIR model. (b) The
processing process of NN. (1) and (3) are the variablesx tandx t+∆t at adjacent time points. (2) Dynamical model.
(4) Simple NN model. (5) After inputtingx t, NN predictsx t+∆t as ˆx t+∆t. (6)A xtis the Jacobian matrix of the
trained model atx t. (7) Σ xtis the covariance matrix estimated by the mean square error ofx t+∆t. (8) The numerical
solution of Γ α. (c) Training data as NIS+. (d) The numerical solution ofATΣ−1Ain NN trained SIR model. (e)
The numerical solution of Σ−1in NN trained SIR model. (f) Distribution ofr ϵin sample space (SIR) with different
(S, I). (g) Distribution of ∆Γ αunder different (S, I). (h) The singular value spectrum ofATΣ−1Aand Σ−1in NN
trained SIR model. (i) The frequency ofr ϵunder different samplesAT
xtΣ−1
xtAxt. (j) Maximum ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.8685 when
the training period is around 50,000 asϵ= 5. (k) The changing trend of CE under differentσ, the threshold for
trend change is aroundσ= 0.01. (l) The coarse-graining matrixWfor NN. (m) The coarse-graining matrixW NIS+
of NIS+. For the convenience of observation, we have taken absolute values for each dimension inWandW NIS+ .
13

--- PAGE 14 ---

By feeding the micro-state data into a forward neural network (NN) calledCovariance Learner Network, we
can use this model to approximate the micro-dynamics of the SIR model. The model we trained has the following
structure:
•Input layer: The NN hasn= 4 input neurons, corresponding to the size of the input vectorx t.
•Hidden layers: The network contains two hidden layers. The first hidden layer hashidden size= 64 neurons,
followed by aLeakyReLUactivation function. The second hidden layer also hashidden size= 64 neurons, followed
by anotherLeakyReLUactivation.
•Output layer: The output layer contains two parts. The first part,f µ, outputs a mean vectorµof sizen. The
second part,f L, outputs the elements of the lower triangular part of the Cholesky decomposition of the covariance
matrix, with sizen×n.
Formally, given an input, the network applies a series of transformations:
h1=LeakyRELU(B 1xt+b1),
h2=LeakyRELU(B 2h1+b2),
µ=B µh2+bµ,
LΣ=B Lh2+bL,(2.25)
whereBandbdenote trainable weight matrices and biases. The predictedf(x t) and final covariance matrix are
then computed as:
f(xt) =µ,
Σ =L ΣLT
Σ.(2.26)
After that, we use a negative logarithmic likelihood loss function (NLL) as
NLL=1
2h
(xt+1−f(x t))TΣ−1
xt(xt+1−f(x t)) + ln det(Σ xt) +nln(2π)i
(2.27)
to train the parameters of the dynamical functionf(x t) and the covariance matrix Σ xtsimultaneously.
Since the quantification of our CE framework does not require a pre-setting coarse-grained strategy and the
coarse-grained function can be directly obtained from the SVD ofATΣ−1Aafter settingr ϵ, we can directly calculate
the degree of CE by ∆Γ αand ignore the learning processes of encoder, decoder and macro-dynamics in NIS+ as
mentioned in [27]. Due to the nonlinearity of the SIR dynamics, we cannot directly use the CE quantification
method of linear GIS. Instead, we approximate NN as a linear mapping at different inputx tby Taylor expansion
(see the method in Appendix D.1). We can obtain the CE identification result and the final coarse-graining strategy
directly by calculatingA xt=∇f(x t) as the Jacobian matrix of the trained NN model atx t. And Σ xtis the
covariance matrix that neural networks can directly output. Due to the differences under differentx t, we can
randomly generatex twith a uniform distribution on the domainXof the SIR dynamics and take the average value
asATΣ−1A≈ ⟨AT
xtΣ−1
xtAxt⟩xt∈Xand Σ−1≈ ⟨Σ−1
xt⟩xt∈Xto calculate ∆Γ αof the system. Fig.5b visualizes the method
of computation for ∆Γ on a multivariate Gaussian model.
Using the data in Fig.5c, we can perform SVD on matricesATΣ−1Aand Σ−1in Fig.5d and Fig.5e. In Fig.5h,
we can see the singular value spectrum of matricesATΣ−1Aand Σ−1in which the horizontal axis represents the
sequence number of singular values arranged in descending order, while the vertical axis represents the magnitude
of singular valuess i, κi. Due to the existence of the copy operation, even the simplest NN can recognize only two
dimensions with larger singular values asr ϵ= 2 whenϵ= 5. If we directly calculater ϵbyAT
xtΣ−1
xtAxtasx tis
sampled from the test data set and plotr ϵas a matrix related toS, Iin Fig.5f, we can see that most positions satisfy
rϵ= 2. By calculating the frequency ofr ϵunder different samplesAT
xtΣ−1
xtAxt, from Fig.5i we can find thatr ϵ= 2
has the highest frequency.
From Fig.5h,ATΣ−1Ahas two larger singular values andr ϵ= 2 asϵ= 5. In model training, we get the value
of Vague CE as ∆Γ α(ϵ) = 0.8685 when the training period is 50,000, which is shown in Fig.5j. We can also directly
calculate ∆Γ α(ϵ) byAT
xtΣ−1
xtAxtasx tis sampled from the test data set and plot ∆Γ αas a matrix related toS, Iin
Fig.5g. Comparing Fig.5f and Fig.5g, we can see that the most stable region ofr ϵand the region with the highest
∆Γα(ϵ) are almost identical as (S, I) roughly located within a circle with a radius of 0.5 and a center of (0,0).
We can also compare the results of our framework and NIS+ mentioned in [27]. From Fig.5l and Fig.5m, we can
see that the coarse-graining matrixWobtained through the singular vectors and the Jacobian matrixW NIS+ of
the NIS+ coarse-graining encoder are similar. For the convenience of observation, we have taken absolute values for
each dimension inWandW NIS+ . Both coarse-graining methods indicate that the first and the third micro-state
dimensions mainly influence the first macro-state dimension, while the second and fourth micro-state dimensions
14

--- PAGE 15 ---

mainly influence the second macro-state dimension. Both the values ofWandW NIS+ are consistent with the copy
method (Fig.4a), which is used during data generation. In addition, we can test the changing trend of CE under
differentσ. From Fig.5k, Whenσ <0.01, ∆Γ α(ϵ) is positively correlated withσ, and whenσ >0.01, the two are
negatively correlated. We can see that the turning point for CE is aroundσ= 0.01, which is consistent with the
value obtained by NIS+ [27].
However, our framework addresses the decline in training efficiency associated with encoder training in NIS+,
leading to a more streamlined and effective approach to model training and CE detection.
3 Conclusion and discussion
This article presents the approximate dynamical reversibility Γ αas a new exact quantification of CE for GIS. Γ α
only depends on the singular values of forward and backward dynamic covariances Σ andA†Σ(A†)Twithout requiring
predefined coarse-graining strategiesϕ(x) =Wx. By retaining only the maximumr ϵsingular values of Σ−1and
ATΣ−1A, we can directly quantify CE of the system as ∆Γ α. Better than EI-based CE, approximate dynamical
reversibility with SVD directly provides accurate CE, which significantly improves accuracy and computational
efficiency in both analytical solution computation and NN machine learning. This lays the foundation for detecting
and measuring CE in more complex systems such as the brain and weather.
At the same time, we can directly obtain the optimalWbased on the singular vectors matrix of the two inverse
covariance matrices. This method balancing the conflict between preserving singular values in Σ−1andATΣ−1A
while also calculating ∆Γ α(ϵ) closer to theoretical values. From the directly obtainedW, we can see more clearly the
strategies for aggregating micro-states into macro-states, where highly correlated dimensions can be aggregated and
dimensions with too small singular values can be discarded. Traditionally quantifying CE by ∆Jrequires pre-setting
coarse-graining strategiesϕand optimizing its parametersW∈ Rk×n. When optimizingW, we must specify a subset
ofRk×nin advance as a limited range, such asW†=WT, to avoidJ Mbeing divergent, which is very subjective
and complicated. The method in this article can save the resources occupied by the process of optimizingW, the
conclusion is more reasonable and interpretable while providing a reference value for observing and predicting the
macroscopic state of the system.
Compared to the SVD-based CE of TPM, ∆Γ αfor GIS offers clearer insights into the correlation between SVD-
based and EI-based CE. Both indicators correlate positively withAand negatively with Σ. Through assumptions
and calculations, ∆Γ α(ϵ) and ∆J∗are approximately linear and positively correlated as ∆Γ α(ϵ)≃(1−α
4)∆J∗.
The equal sign holds when the backward dynamics is a normalized normal distribution. In general, we can randomly
generateAand Σ to see a clear linear correlation in the scatter plot of ∆Γ α(ϵ) and ∆J∗. We also reveal how
the parameterαaffects determinacy and degeneracy. Although these results can be obtained through numerical
simulations on TPM, it is difficult to directly prove the underlying reasons without the help of GIS. Moreover, since
most real-world data exist in continuous spaces rather than binary distributions, studying SVD-based CE in GIS has
broader applicability.
In addition to the concept of reversible quantification of CE itself, another important innovation is the object of
SVD. It is common to use SVD to study the dynamics of systems. For example, Chen et al. use singular values of
the system’s ensemble matrix to find the critical phase transition of the system [60, 61], like Earth [62] and Stock
markets [63]. In addition to studying the free evolution of systems, Antolus et al. also consider SVD as a key factor
in control theory [64–66]. The system can be reduced based on SVD, and controlling the dimensions corresponding
to the largest few singular values can determine the state transition of the whole system. Similarly, for complex
NN models, the memory usage of the parameters can be reduced by retaining only the major singular values of the
gradient matrix [67–69]. These contents provide references for our expansion of SVD-based CE.
In synergetics [70], model dimensionality can be reduced through adiabatic approximation or exact elimination.
Stable modes are removed either by the adiabatic elimination method, which simplifies the derivation of order param-
eter equations, or by the systematic elimination method, which expresses the slaving principle in exact mathematical
form for broader applicability. Both approaches analyze the eigenstructure of the system’s linearized parameterA
(or Jacobian) matrix to identify slowly varying unstable modes (order parameters) and eliminate fast-decaying stable
modes, yielding a low-dimensional description of the system’s steady states and dynamics. This framework, however,
also focuses on system parameters and neglects the influence of noise transformations.
We discover that traditional research about dimensionality reduction and macro-states of dynamical systems
focuses on the dynamical function, often overlooking noise and its covariance matrix, and disregarding random noise
as mere error or disturbance. However, we find that the covariance matrix also contains crucial information about
the system. Our work focuses on covariance matrices, and the covariance matrix of backward dynamicsA†Σ(A†)T
precisely contains both the dynamic parametersAand the covariance of forward dynamics Σ. Whether calculating
15

--- PAGE 16 ---

CE or deriving coarse-graining strategies, we consider both the dynamics and randomness of the system. This is an
important part of our new research.
While our approach has made progress, several challenges remain unresolved. The first limitation is that our
model is currently restricted to linear GIS, with nonlinear GIS approximated in a locally linear form. However, this
approximation introduces stability issues, as the gradient of nonlinear functions may be ill-conditioned. In particular,
cases where∇f(x) = 0 or∇f(x)→ ∞lead to the breakdown of our framework. To address this, incorporating
higher-order derivatives as a refined CE metric warrants further investigation.
The second issue arises when time is continuous rather than discrete, the existing CE quantification lacks objective
formulations. The approach in this study discretizes time, converting differential equations into difference equations,
where the choice of hyperparameter ∆tstrongly influences CE. As ∆t→0, state transitionsx t→x t+∆t exhibit
minimal variation, causing the rate of change to vanish. For continuous-time stochastic differential equations, a more
principled CE measure is required to account for infinitesimal evolution dynamics.
The third issue is that both SVD-based and EI-based CE quantification methods require training an NN to infer
dynamics when the governing equations are unknown. However, NN-based approaches are data-dependent and prone
to parameter estimation errors, particularly in capturing interdimensional correlations. In our case, a multivariate
Gaussian model approximates both the dynamical function and covariance. Yet, under high noise or limited data, the
learned dynamics may deviate from the true system, leading to unreliable CE estimates. For systems with unknown
models, it is crucial to develop representations that jointly approximate both the underlying dynamics and noise
structure.
Future work will focus on optimizing the existing framework and extending its application to more complex
systems. In numerical simulations, machine learning can be leveraged to learn intricate dynamical models, such
as Vicsek and Kuramoto, which are analytically intractable. This allows for data-driven CE estimation and the
exploration of its relationship with critical states. Additionally, our approach can be applied to real-world datasets,
such as meteorological and EEG data, to identify practical problems where CE provides meaningful insights.
4 Supplementary Material
The supplementary material provides detailed calculation processes for effective informationEIand approximate
dynamical reversibility Γ α, from the simplest one-dimensional system to general high-dimensional situations. Espe-
cially forEIand Γ αin cases whereAis a full-rank or non-square matrix, we provide computational references. After
providing a detailed proof process, we use randomly generated scatter plots to show the linear correlation between
two indicators Γ αandJ, as well as ∆Γ α(ϵ) and ∆J∗based on which. The original coarse-graining strategy and the
coarse-graining strategy of the standardized model, which were not mentioned in the article, have also been discussed
in the supplementary material. In the end, we add the case of the Markov Gaussian system, providing ideas for
combining our framework with integrated information theory, Markov chain with TPM, and even neural data.
Acknowledgments:This work is inspired by the insightful discussions held in the ”Causal Emergence” series
reading groups organized by Swarma Club and the ”Swarma-Kaifeng” Workshop. Sincere thanks to Mr. Jiayun Wu,
Ms. Ruiyang Feng, Mr. Zhang Zhang, Ms. Ruyi Tao, Mr. Keng-Hou Leong, Ms. Wanting Su, Mr. Aobo Lyu,
and Mr. Muyun Mou for their suggestions and support on theory, methods, and writing. We would also like to
extend our sincere gratitude to Prof. Yizhuang You, Dr. Peng Cui, Dr. Jing He, Dr. Chaochao Lu, and Dr. Yanbo
Zhang for their invaluable contributions and insightful discussions. We express our appreciation for the support from
the Save 2050 Programme, a joint initiative of Swarma Club and X-OrderSwarma Research. Additionally, we are
grateful for the support received from Swarma Research. We also thank the large language models ChatGPT and
Deepseek for their assistance in refining our paper writing.
Data Availability Statement:All the codes and data are available at:https://github.com/kilovoltage/
SVD-based_CE_Gaussian.
References
[1] S. E. Jørgensen and F. M¨ uller, “Ecosystems as complex systems,”Handbook of Ecosystem Theories and Man-
agement. CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, pp. 5–20, 2000.
[2] R. T. Wicks, S. C. Chapman, and R. Dendy, “Mutual information as a tool for identifying phase transitions in
dynamical complex systems with limited data,”Physical Review E, vol. 75, no. 5, p. 051125, 2007.
16

--- PAGE 17 ---

[3] C. Hartman and B. Benes, “Autonomous boids,”Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, vol. 17, no. 3-4,
pp. 199–206, 2006.
[4] S. Jingnan, J. He, and X. Gao, “Neurofeedback training of control network improves ssvep-based bci performance
in children,” 2021.
[5] O. Sporns, J. Faskowitz, A. S. Teixeira, S. A. Cutts, and R. F. Betzel, “Dynamic expression of brain functional
systems disclosed by fine-scale analysis of edge time series,”Network Neuroscience, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 405–433,
2021.
[6] T. F. Varley,Uncovering Higher-Order Structures in Complex Systems with Multivariate Information Theory.
Indiana University, 2023.
[7] Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, J. He, J. Zhao, Y. Cai, J. Fan, X. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Lu,et al., “Two-photon synthetic
aperture microscopy for minimally invasive fast 3d imaging of native subcellular behaviors in deep tissue,”Cell,
vol. 186, no. 11, pp. 2475–2491, 2023.
[8] T. Dong, J. He, S. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Cheng, and Y. Zhong, “Inability to activate rac1-dependent forgetting
contributes to behavioral inflexibility in mutants of multiple autism-risk genes,”Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 27, pp. 7644–7649, 2016.
[9] L. Ma, X.-D. Yang, F. Yang, X.-J. Zhou, and Z.-W. Wu, “Unveiling the early stage evolution of local atomic
structures in the crystallization process of a metallic glass,”Chinese Physics B, vol. 33, no. 3, p. 036402, 2024.
[10] H. S. Bennett and J. J. Filliben, “A systematic approach for multidimensional, closed-form analytic modeling:
minority electron mobilities in ga1- xalxas heterostructures,”Journal of Research of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, vol. 105, no. 3, p. 441, 2000.
[11] A. Albrecht, D. Coulson, P. Ferreira, and J. Magueijo, “Causality, randomness, and the microwave background,”
Physical Review Letters, vol. 76, no. 9, p. 1413, 1996.
[12] T. Schreiber, “Measuring information transfer,”Physical review letters, vol. 85, no. 2, p. 461, 2000.
[13] M. G. Rosenblum and A. S. Pikovsky, “Detecting direction of coupling in interacting oscillators,”Physical
Review E, vol. 64, no. 4, p. 045202, 2001.
[14] D. Harnack, E. Laminski, M. Sch¨ unemann, and K. R. Pawelzik, “Topological causality in dynamical systems,”
Physical review letters, vol. 119, no. 9, p. 098301, 2017.
[15] G. Tononi and O. Sporns, “Measuring information integration,”BMC neuroscience, vol. 4, pp. 1–20, 2003.
[16] E. P. Hoel, L. Albantakis, and G. Tononi, “Quantifying causal emergence shows that macro can beat micro,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 110, no. 49, pp. 19790–19795, 2013.
[17] E. P. Hoel, “When the map is better than the territory,”Entropy, vol. 19, no. 5, p. 188, 2017.
[18] F. E. Rosas, P. A. M. Mediano, H. J. Jensen, A. K. Seth, A. B. Barrett, R. L. Carhart-Harris, and D. Bor,
“Reconciling emergences: An information-theoretic approach to identify causal emergence in multivariate data,”
PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 16, p. e1008289, Dec 2020.
[19] L. Barnett and A. K. Seth, “Dynamical independence: discovering emergent macroscopic processes in complex
dynamical systems,”Physical Review E, vol. 108, no. 1, p. 014304, 2023.
[20] B. Yuan, J. Zhang, A. Lyu, J. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yang, K. Liu, M. Mou, and P. Cui, “Emergence and causality
in complex systems: A survey of causal emergence and related quantitative studies,”Entropy, vol. 26, no. 2,
p. 108, 2024.
[21] E. P. Hoel, L. Albantakis, W. Marshall, and G. Tononi, “Can the macro beat the micro? integrated information
across spatiotemporal scales,”Neuroscience of Consciousness, vol. 2016, no. 1, p. niw012, 2016.
[22] S. Bornholdt, “Boolean network models of cellular regulation: prospects and limitations,”Journal of the Royal
Society interface, vol. 5, no. suppl 1, pp. S85–S94, 2008.
[23] E. W. Weisstein, “Cellular automaton,”https://mathworld. wolfram. com/, 2002.
17

--- PAGE 18 ---

[24] P. Chvykov and E. Hoel, “Causal geometry,”Entropy, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 24, 2020.
[25] K. Liu, B. Yuan, and J. Zhang, “An exact theory of causal emergence for linear stochastic iteration systems,”
Entropy, vol. 26, no. 8, 2024.
[26] J. Zhang and K. Liu, “Neural information squeezer for causal emergence,”Entropy, vol. 25, no. 1, p. 26, 2022.
[27] M. Yang, Z. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Rong, B. Yuan, and J. Zhang, “Finding emergence in data by maximizing effective
information,”National Science Review, p. nwae279, 2024.
[28] C. W. Reynolds, “Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral model,” inProceedings of the 14th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 25–34, 1987.
[29] S. M. Smith, K. L. Miller, G. Salimi-Khorshidi, M. Webster, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. Nichols, J. D. Ramsey, and
M. W. Woolrich, “Network modelling methods for fmri,”NeuroImage, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 875–891, 2011.
[30] P. L. Williams and R. D. Beer, “Nonnegative decomposition of multivariate information,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:1004.2515, 2010.
[31] A. I. Luppi, P. A. Mediano, F. E. Rosas, D. J. Harrison, R. L. Carhart-Harris, D. Bor, and E. A. Stamatakis,
“What it is like to be a bit: an integrated information decomposition account of emergent mental phenomena,”
Neuroscience of consciousness, vol. 2021, no. 2, p. niab027, 2021.
[32] J. Song and S. Ermon, “Understanding the limitations of variational mutual information estimators,” 2020.
[33] C. Kaplanis, P. Mediano, and F. Rosas, “Learning causally emergent representations,” inNeurIPS 2023 work-
shop: Information-Theoretic Principles in Cognitive Systems, 2023.
[34] D. McSharry, C. Kaplanis, F. Rosas, and P. A. Mediano, “Learning diverse causally emergent representations
from time series data,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 119547–119572, 2024.
[35] Z. C. Chao, Y. Nagasaka, and N. Fujii, “Long-term asynchronous decoding of arm motion using electrocortico-
graphic signals in monkey,”Frontiers in neuroengineering, vol. 3, p. 1189, 2010.
[36] S. D. Muthukumaraswamy and D. T. Liley, “1/f electrophysiological spectra in resting and drug-induced states
can be explained by the dynamics of multiple oscillatory relaxation processes,”NeuroImage, vol. 179, pp. 582–
595, 2018.
[37] D. Byrne and D. Nelson, “Attraction as a linear function of proportion of positive reinforcements.,”Journal of
personality and social psychology, vol. 1, no. 6, p. 659, 1965.
[38] J. Zhang, R. Tao, K. H. Leong, M. Yang, and B. Yuan, “Dynamical reversibility and a new theory of causal
emergence based on SVD,”npj Complexity, vol. 2, p. 3, Jan. 2025.
[39] A. Zhang and M. Wang, “Spectral state compression of markov processes,”IEEE transactions on information
theory, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 3202–3231, 2019.
[40] C. Lee and D. J. Wilkinson, “A review of stochastic block models and extensions for graph clustering,”Applied
Network Science, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–50, 2019.
[41] K. Liu, X. L¨ u, F. Gao, and J. Zhang, “Expectation-maximizing network reconstruction and most applicable
network types based on binary time series data,”Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 454, p. 133834, 2023.
[42] A. Darmochwa l, “The euclidean space,”Formalized Mathematics, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 599–603, 1991.
[43] Z. J. Jurek, “On stability of probability measures in euclidean spaces,” inProbability Theory on Vector Spaces
II: Proceedings, B la˙ zejewko, Poland, September 17–23, 1979, pp. 128–145, Springer, 2006.
[44] W. Dunsmuir and E. J. Hannan, “Vector linear time series models,”Advances in Applied Probability, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 339–364, 1976.
[45] L. Arnold, C. K. Jones, K. Mischaikow, G. Raugel, and L. Arnold,Random dynamical systems. Springer, 1995.
[46] M. I. Jordanet al., “Why the logistic function? a tutorial discussion on probabilities and neural networks,”
1995.
18

--- PAGE 19 ---

[47] O. Knill, “Cauchy–binet for pseudo-determinants,”Linear Algebra and its Applications, vol. 459, pp. 522–547,
2014.
[48] P. D. Lax,Functional analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[49] R. N. Bracewell, “The fourier transform,”Scientific American, vol. 260, no. 6, pp. 86–95, 1989.
[50] J. C. A. Barata and M. S. Hussein, “The moore–penrose pseudoinverse: A tutorial review of the theory,”
Brazilian Journal of Physics, vol. 42, pp. 146–165, 2012.
[51] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson,Matrix analysis. Cambridge university press, 2012.
[52] M. Yang, Z. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Rong, B. Yuan, and J. Zhang, “Finding emergence in data: causal emergence
inspired dynamics learning,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09952, 2023.
[53] E. Hoel, “Causal emergence 2.0: Quantifying emergent complexity,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13395, 2025.
[54] B. Klein and E. Hoel, “The emergence of informative higher scales in complex networks,”Complexity, vol. 2020,
pp. 1–12, 2020.
[55] R. Comolatti and E. Hoel, “Causal emergence is widespread across measures of causation,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.01854, 2022.
[56] E. Hoel,The world behind the world: Consciousness, Free Will, and the Limits of Science. Simon and Schuster,
2024.
[57] O. Galor and D. N. Weil, “Population, technology, and growth: From malthusian stagnation to the demographic
transition and beyond,”American economic review, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 806–828, 2000.
[58] R. A. Maller, G. M¨ uller, and A. Szimayer, “Ornstein–uhlenbeck processes and extensions,”Handbook of financial
time series, pp. 421–437, 2009.
[59] J. Satsuma, R. Willox, A. Ramani, B. Grammaticos, and A. S. Carstea, “Extending the sir epidemic model,”
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 336, no. 3-4, pp. 369–375, 2004.
[60] Y. Sun, G. Hu, Y. Zhang, B. Lu, Z. Lu, J. Fan, X. Li, Q. Deng, and X. Chen, “Eigen microstates and their
evolutions in complex systems,”Communications in Theoretical Physics, vol. 73, no. 6, p. 065603, 2021.
[61] G. Hu, T. Liu, M. Liu, W. Chen, and X. Chen, “Condensation of eigen microstate in statistical ensemble and
phase transition,”Science China Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy, vol. 62, pp. 1–8, 2019.
[62] J. Fan, J. Meng, J. Ludescher, X. Chen, Y. Ashkenazy, J. Kurths, S. Havlin, and H. J. Schellnhuber, “Statistical
physics approaches to the complex earth system,”Physics reports, vol. 896, pp. 1–84, 2021.
[63] D. Sornette, “Physics and financial economics (1776–2014): puzzles, ising and agent-based models,”Reports on
progress in physics, vol. 77, no. 6, p. 062001, 2014.
[64] K. Gallivan, E. Grimme, and P. Van Dooren, “Asymptotic waveform evaluation via a lanczos method,”Applied
Mathematics Letters, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 75–80, 1994.
[65] S. Gugercin, “An iterative svd-krylov based method for model reduction of large-scale dynamical systems,”
Linear Algebra and its Applications, vol. 428, no. 8-9, pp. 1964–1986, 2008.
[66] A. C. Antoulas, “An overview of approximation methods for large-scale dynamical systems,”Annual reviews in
Control, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 181–190, 2005.
[67] J. Xue, J. Li, and Y. Gong, “Restructuring of deep neural network acoustic models with singular value decom-
position.,” inInterspeech, pp. 2365–2369, 2013.
[68] J. Zhang, Q. Lei, and I. Dhillon, “Stabilizing gradients for deep neural networks via efficient svd parameteriza-
tion,” inInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5806–5814, PMLR, 2018.
[69] M. M. Bejani and M. Ghatee, “Theory of adaptive svd regularization for deep neural networks,”Neural Networks,
vol. 128, pp. 33–46, 2020.
[70] D. Wu, L. Cao, and L. Chen,Principles and Applications of Synergetics. Huazhong University of Science and
Technology Press, 1990.
19
